---
layout: post
title:  "TILTW: Psuedo-elements and jQuery, the idiosyncrasies of Rails engines, and the Sass parent selector"
categories: sass jQuery rails
---

Each week I learn something new.  At the end of the week, I pick a couple of things to write about that I think are cool. You may
<a title="Share on Twitter" data-network="twitter" data-action="share" href="https://twitter.com/share?url=http://internetross.me/tiltw-dec-30-jan-3&amp;text=@internetross, I like you, but..." target="_blank">
disagree</a>.

## Getting psuedo-element properties with the realest jQueriest
Because you're a sexy modern web developer, you're likely a frequent user of the `:before` and `:after` pseudo-elements to make wondrous things with CSS. Create shapes, add icons from symbol sets, fades for modals, and [other non-standard exploits](http://css-tricks.com/pseudo-element-roundup/).  It's also likely, then, that you've encountered the difficulty manipulating pseudo-elements with jQuery.

This week I was messing with setting the `content` property on `:before` elements of list items, and considering ways to animate a character change - e.g, fade from a dot to an "x" to signify a "remove" action for the user.  My first exploration was some jQuery that looked like:

```javascript
$('li').hover(function() {
	$('.element:before').fadeOut().css('content', 'x').fadeIn()
}
```

But fail.  So I wondered why and my research led me to [Stack Overflow](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/5041494/manipulating-css-pseudo-elements-using-jquery-e-g-before-and-after) again, and to an answer<sup>[1](#1)</sup>.     

Unfortunately, while pseudo-elements are recognized and parsed by browsers in stylesheets, they are not part of the DOM and therefore are inappropriate as part of jQuery selectors.  The w3 [spec](http://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-api/#grammar) reinforces the same: 

> Authors are advised that while the use of pseudo-elements in selectors is permitted, they will not match any elements in the document, and thus would not result in any elements being returned.

However.  If you are in dire need to access pseudo-element properties programmatically with JavaScript you can take advantage of `getComputedStyle()` and do something like this:    

```javascript
// Get the content value of .element:before
var content = window.getComputedStyle(
	document.querySelector('.element'), ':before'
).getPropertyValue('content');
```

Hat tip to the estimable [David Walsh](http://davidwalsh.name/ways-css-javascript-interact) for the example.  The only gotcha, per usual, is that `getComputedStyle` is supported IE9+.  Sigh.

## Under the hood
At [Science Exchange](http://www.scienceexchange.com) we've begun breaking apart our monolithic Rails app into smaller engines to help separate various concerns and modularize code.  We've been inspired in part by Spree, which is a great [example](https://github.com/spree/spree) of a modular app framework - you'll notice a very reasonable partition of functionality into api, backend, and frontend groups.

Engines.  Man.  Rails constantly wears an impish grin and I shake my fist.  It's amazing how many times I've failed to get something working by omitting or mis-using the smallest of lines of code.  In building the frontend engine for SciEx, I wrestled with two mysterious problems with simple, totally obscure, solutions.  

First.  Use underscores for engine names.  If you don't, you're engine's routing borks.  Rails expects underscores, which, like, how would you know that as a noob?  So after staring at the screen for a good while, I pleaded for help from a work homie, who in turn suggested running `rake routes`.  Which helped expose that Rails was searching for **my_engine**/path/to/greatness not **my-engine**/path/to/death.  The `rakes routes' command is definitely a new besty.

Ok, second gotcha.  Adding gem dependencies to your engine's gemspec file will not add the assets to the asset pipeline.  You'd think it would, because this is how you'd expect dependency inclusions like they normally do in your main app - just add to the Gemfile and voilà!  Against all reason, one more step is actually necessary.  

You need to add the following `require` line to your engine's `engine.rb`:

```ruby
module MyRailsEngine
  class Engine < ::Rails::Engine
    require 'that_dependency'
  end
end
```

Reboot and you're assets will be pre-processed into the asset pipeline and loadable via your JavaScript and CSS manifests (application.css && application.js).

## Sassy Parental Units

Yes, more love for Sass. 

If you're a modern sexy web developer, then you know the benefits of Sass are humungous. So chances are you aware of referencing parent selectors on nested classes with the **"&"** character and achieving maximum code raditude.  A simple example:

```css
// Sass
.parent
    height: 100%
    &:child    
        height: 50%

// CSS
.parent {
  height: 100%;
}
.parent .child {
  height: 50%;
}
```

But there's actually a more advanced usage of the parent selector which can really start to make things interesting, read: better. Putting the **"&"** after.

Recently I've been working on a hand-crafted CSS framework for [SciEx](http://www.scienceexchange.com) and one of my key principles in designing the thing has been readability.  Particularly at the scan level. When a dev scans the stylesheet, they should be able to perceive natural groupings and object scopes.  

Naturally, parent selectors have been a big help.  

Let me give you an example of floating a main column depending on the orientation of the layout defined by its container class.

```css
// Without a parent selector
.l-main
	width: 715px
.l-two-up-lt .l-main
	float: left
.l-two-up-lt .l-main
	float: right

// With a parent selector
.l-main
	width: 715px
	.l-two-up-lt &
		float: left
	.l-two-up-rt &
		float: right

// Output
.l-main {
  width: 715px;
}
.l-two-up-lt .l-main {
  float: left;
}
.l-two-up-rt .l-main {
  float: right;
}
```

The second Sass rule group is way easier to scan because your brain quickly identifies a scope by virtue of the nesting.  If the concern is to work with the style rules of the main column (.l-main), all that the dev needs will be contained beneath that top level .l-main class.  S/he won't have to put any extra search effort to find relevant classes.  

There's an [article](http://thesassway.com/intermediate/referencing-parent-selectors-using-ampersand) on the Sass Way that's a bit more in-depth on the topic.  And then the [after-party](http://www.joeloliveira.com/2011/06/28/the-ampersand-a-killer-sass-feature/) to that article is here - especially read if you use modernizr or other shim frameworks that write classes to `<body>`.

<sup id="1">1</sup> Stack Overflow really is like the App store of code problems.  "There's an *answer* for that."